---
description: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KMgPxVnKLSk
---

# Cristiano Amon: Qualcomm CEO | Lex Fridman Podcast #280

Date: 04/27/2022

Duration: 1 hours, 9 minutes, 10 seconds

Model: Whisper-small

Talking about exciting thing for an engineer, the same Snapdragon that goes to a phone and it can go to a Galaxy phone, for example, Samsung, the same, not a special one, went all the way to Mars. You expect to have a full day of battery life. But then you wanted to not be sending data into 10 or 100 megabits, you want gigabits, you wanted to be able to have eight core processors, you want to have a GPU with rate tracing, you want to have all of those things that you can only get into sometimes a desktop PC.

To do all of that in your phone is an incredible thing. Some people raise concerns about there not being enough studies about the effects of 5G on the human body. It's 5G safe. The following is a conversation with Cristiano Aman, the CEO of Qualcomm, the company that's one of the leaders in the world in the space of mobile communication and computation. That's 2G, 3G, 4G and 5G that connects billions of phones and the Snapdragon processor and system on a chip that is the brain of most of the premium Android phones in the world. This is a Lex Freeman podcast.

To support it, please check out our sponsors in the description. And now, dear friends, here's Cristiano Aman. You are originally from Brazil, so let me ask the most important question, the most profound question, the biggest question. Who's the greatest football soccer player of all time? Look, everybody's going to say Pele. And actually, I was born during the game of Brazil and Italy that Pele gave Brazil the championship. Actually, my dad tells me that the doctor had a TV on at the delivery room. But so everybody will say Pele, but I really like Ronaldo. The first Ronaldo, the first Ronaldo, I really like him.

That's my favorite player. By the way, not everybody would say Pele. But we should leave that on the table and agree to disagree. Brazilians will say Pele. Yes. There's other countries around that region that made you may disagree a little. Very aware. Qualcomm is largely responsible for 5G and some of the greatest processors in our smartphones ever built. So we got communication and computation tech that impacts probably billions of people. So if you zoom out, use a human, look at humans on earth in general, does it blow your mind that we have these billions of smartphones communicating? And each of them have the computational power? You know, you talk about 10 billion transistors.

That's a million times more than 50 years ago in the best computers in the world. Like if you just zoom out as a human, does that blow your mind? Absolutely. Look, one of the reasons I think I love this company is we know that the technology we develop can change the world. And I'll tell you one more thing. Beyond the amount of processing power that you have now and the palm of your hands and being every one of the word is connected with broadband technology. The smartphone is also mankind's largest development platform. There's nothing like it.

So you respect both the hardware and the software? Both. Both. If aliens were observing earth over the past 50 to 70 years, how do you think they would describe this particular turmoil, fun things going on on the surface of this particular little planet? We live in interesting times. In one time, we see incredible development of technology for mankind just to happen in the last century. You know, the night from 1900 to the 2000, it was incredible development. Just look 2000 or 22 years ago, how far we're coming and where we go in with technology. It's incredible.

What do you think they would notice? So there's road networks, there's all kinds of networks, there's, there's lights that keep popping up cities, bringing up like it from an alien perspective, you're observing. Well, what I'm going to tell you is you have this contrast of incredible development of technology, but then you see some of the things that are happening right now, which is probably will not expect them to happen on the 21st century, just won't happen in Ukraine. So I think that that will be a more puzzling question for the aliens, I would imagine. The new technology is kind of impressive.

Actually, they might not be so puzzling because that's just human nature revealing itself as it has throughout human history. That's correct. Let's talk about wireless communication. So Qualcomm was instrumental in developing 5G. Now you were with Qualcomm since the early days, the good old 90s with the 2G. But what is 5G, including sub six gigahertz 5G and middle matter wave 5G? How does it work? And maybe the most important question is how will it change the world in the coming years? When we set ourselves to develop 5G, and, you know, we look at this, every generation of technology had a problem to be solved, right? So you mentioned 2G, 2G challenge, the challenge of CDMA was, can we give every person on Earth a cell phone? That was, can you get to a technology that you can basically allow everyone to have a mobile phone? 3G was about the ability to connect that to the internet.

I think 4G was broadband and with 4G was about have the ability for you to have a computer in the palm of your hand. We just talk about that. 5G, the challenge was a little bit different. It's how do we build a technology for a society that is going to be a hundred percent connected to the cloud? How do we provide a technology that is going to be the last mile connectivity for everything? So 5G is basically been designed, eliminate all issues with data congestion, whether you are in a stadium, we talk about soccer, you're in a stadium and everyone should be ability to have access to broadband.

So deal with congestion. Deal with the fact that not only people, but billions of things need to be connected. Create a technology that for the first time in Warless, you could deliver mission critical services. Warless used to up to 4G is is best effort. In 5G, it can guarantee that you're connected with the cloud. And then the last point of that is provide this fabric that will allow us as a society to look at things that are not connected and say that's the exception. That's why we made a comparison in the early days of 5G that that's going to be like electricity.

Right now you don't have a discussion about what is the use cases for electricity. You don't talk about that anymore. You just assume it's there and that's how we think about everything connected to the cloud. That's what 5G is and that's the role of 5G. So first of all, everything connected to the cloud is interesting because the space of everything is constantly increasing. That is correct. You know, I don't think the refrigerator over there looks kind of smart, but I don't think it's connected yet to the cloud. So this includes Internet of Things. What is the full space of everything? The full space of everything is it's maybe going back to where you start defining Qualcomm.

Qualcomm is about communications and advanced computers for low power devices. And can we make everything smart? You know, it can range from the robot you have right now on the floor, to your refrigerator, to a camera, to, you know, machines and manufacturing, to retail, etc. I can give you some examples. When we think of something as simple as going to the grocery shop, we see technology now with something that stuff would be working with companies like Walmart, electronic shelf labels, the ability for you to have smart cameras that can look at shelves and can the camera is smart enough to say some product needs to be replenished, ability to see what's trapped.

So it's about really providing processor connectivity, artificial intelligence to everything. And I think that's one of the largest addressable markets we have for technology because you can't really define everything. Right, exactly. It's a nice market because it keeps growing potentially exponentially in speed. What about coverage? So how are we doing on the everything part? So, you know, there is, like I mentioned, sub six gigahertz 5G and there's a millimeter wave 5G. So not all 5G is made the same. So there's a speed, there's a bandwidth thing. And then there's coverage. How many people get to enjoy today? And how does the progress of the next 5, 10, 20, 30, 50 years you think it looks like in terms of coverage? Great topic of conversation.

So let's talk about this. When I meet with regulators across the globe, I tell them resistance is futile, allocate every spectrum to wireless. Every spectrum needs to be allocated to wireless. The reality is when we start moving from CDMA to OFDMA, we knew that there's this industry has done a lot to get more bits per hertz. But the reality is the massive amount of improvements that is required in capacity and in speed, you need more spectrum. You know, there's there's not so much we can rely on more bits per hertz. You just need more spectrum.

And if you look, for example, what carriers since the 2G era, they participate in different license and auctions and every spectrum they accumulated from 2G or 3G or 4G, all of that you may be able to get one or two channels max of subsets, which is a channel is about 100 megahertz or 200 megahertz. And that's it. So we need more spectrum. So 5G has been designed to work across every spectrum from the low frequency bands. That's what we call the sub six. But you needed more. You needed to go to the millimeter wave. So that's why 5G is a technology that you can deploy from 450 megahertz as an example or 600 or 700, all the way to in the 42 gigahertz.

And that's where millimeter wave comes into the picture. Now, let's now connect this to your question about coverage of 5G. The easiest thing to do is to deploy 5G in the new spectrum you can get, which is in the sub six, you see bands being auctioned across the globe into 3.5 gigahertz. There's nothing special about the band. Is this the one on one that was available because everything else being useful for G and you can deploy on that going to existing cell towers and just put a new equipment without having to build new towers. But when we go to technologies just millimeter wave, then you have to build more dense networks.

You need to build more stations because a deployment in that case looked like a Wi Fi deployment. It's almost like Wi Fi access points. When you need to build more stations, you need permits, you need to build fiber so it takes more time to densify. So what you see happening is coverage has been built fast with sub six across the globe. But now the United States also have the sub six. So that gets you to coverage very fast. But millimeter wave, it's moving. And if you all will say, for example, Verizon, United States has had a leadership in building millimeter wave.

It takes time. I'll say cities like Chicago, Manhattan, starting to get coverage. It will be a process over a number of years as you build those different access point type networks, but it's inevitable. There's not enough spectrum. So every 5G operators just a matter of time will have millimeter wave as well. Resistance is futile. Okay, so for millimeter wave, we need density of access points. And what's the biggest resistance for Qualcomm, for human civilization? Is it politicians, regulators, federal regulators? Is it individual humans? Is it not enough money from the consumer perspective? Like who is the biggest pain in the butt? From a Qualcomm standpoint, but answering the question about what it takes to build all this technology.

I think regulators across the board understood the importance of 5G. I have not met a regulator that said it's really important to be late on 5G. I don't think anybody wants to be late on 5G. And as a result, we've seen enormous amount of progress in getting spectrum allocated to 5G. I think the real issue is the time that it takes to build infrastructure. You know, investment in 5G infrastructure, especially millimeter wave, is like building roads and ports. It's critical infrastructure. And those things take time. Like one of the number one obstacles you're going to hear from operators is site permit.

You know, sometimes they have to negotiate municipality by municipality about permits to get new cell sites. But you know, the networks will be densified and you're going to need all of the capacity for the promise of the fully immersive augmented reality that will replace phones and everything being connected 100% of the time. This would not be a conversation with the CEO if I did not ask questions that make you nervous. Some people raise concerns about there not being enough studies about the effects of 5G on the human body. Is 5G safe? Look, I have a very simple answer to this question.

As we build new capabilities such as 5G, power is going down. Especially when you think about reducing the number of base stations, the networks becoming more dense. So as you do that, the power becomes lower. Power radiated from the phone and from the tower. As you get closer to the tower, you don't need that much power to reach the tower. So as we move from 4G to 5G, I think we see a reduction in the amount of powers required to close the radio link. Now, also you have a number of organizations. The FCC, for example, has rigorous programs, which they do a lot of tests to validate the safety of those devices.

And I think we have has been a model for other countries also to adopt the same things. Cellular has been around for a number of decades now. I think smartphones are most beloved device today. And I would argue how it's difficult to answer those questions. But I'll argue that the data to date, have we seen in 3G and 4G, you know, has shown that a lot of the initial concerns were not valid. We look at 5G, even though it's new, it's just less power. So we look at from a physics standpoint. So from a physics, from a biology perspective, there's a lot of evidence, there's studies that show that it's not dangerous, that it is in fact safe.

However, the concern that people have is when you scale technology exponentially, how will that change human civilization? I mean, that doesn't apply to 5G, that applies to every technology. You said smartphone is the most beloved device, but love sometimes hurts. The impact on society, we don't know. And there's a little bit of fear, there's both excitement and fear. It's a great topic, a conversation, actually. So let me give you my perspective on this. And you started to see some things actually happening right now. So let me step back. And let's talk about the fact that we are in a fully interconnected society.

That when you look of the situations today, we talk about smartphones, largest development platform, so much now of our life, we are connected to the smartphone. And we are all connected and we're connected. And then we're building digital twins of everything. So when you look at that picture, when you look at the picture of this connected society, you started to have the following thoughts, which I think are very healthy, which means in the same way that in the physical world, you're entitled to some rights, you have obligations, and there's a lot of things that protect your integrity.

I think as a rule, we're going to see the society evolving, so those things extend to your digital being of people and things. And I think it's just natural. It's just natural. It's just a natural path. And you started to see things like that. For example, the Europeans have done a lot in this area. I'll say the Europeans probably ahead in the United States, thinking about privacy laws, digital privacy law. Most recently, the DMA, the Digital Markets Act, which I think is a great thing. I think we believe there's incredible thought into enabling ability to regulate the digital market so that there's innovation and competitions.

Not a single company can control all the data and then decide how things are going to work on the digital realm. And even if we think about the potential things like the metaverses, we're connecting physical and digital spaces. So I think it's a natural evolution. Of course, regulation and laws always follow technology. But the fact that we're moving toward interconnected society, there's no going back. We are a fully interconnected society. But there is opportunity to think about how the digital to win should people and governments should think about it so that we get the best of a technology without any downside.

Yeah. So when you say digital to win, that's one of the other things you're excited about, which is the metaverse, are basically building worlds in the digital space. And you have to start to think about all the basic human rights that transfer from our physical meat vehicles out to the digital copies of ourselves, representations of ourselves. That's really important to think about. The thing you mentioned about regulators that has been, this is me speaking, frustrating, is like you said, they follow technology. So sometimes they don't get the technology at all. So they're very clumsy in writing laws that censor that technology in interesting ways.

They mean good, but they can do a lot of unintended damage. Now both, it's a dance. It's a beautiful dance, but I just wish governments were better dance partners. I just see what they're kind of writing now about regulating social media and platforms like YouTube. And it's just really, really clumsy. They don't understand how machine learning works. I recommend their systems work. And I just wish they kind of caught up a little more because it's really important to be great at regulation. But also it's important to let companies flourish and embrace this new wave of technology.

That weird dance. I'm more and more learning, looking at public policy, how much positive government can do and how much clumsy negative it can do. Unintentionally, just out of sheer incompetence or lack of curiosity about tech. That's my rant about regulators. I think it's a valid point. As I said before, I think the Europeans probably have a very good framework, but the way I'll think about it, we depend on have the ability to innovate. We depend on the free markets. We depend on the ability to create technology that will be disruptive. But at the same time, I think the tech companies probably should spend time helping governments understand, helping understand ahead of time so that they can be better prepared.

Let's talk about one of my favorite topics. Snap Dragon. So Snap Dragon is a system on a chip. This processor has probably powered billions of smartphones over its pretty long history now, a decade and a half maybe. So it's constantly iterating. There's constant just like a turmoil of beautiful innovations happening. So last year was Snap Dragon 888. It was the main one with the 5 nanometer and this year it's Snap Dragon 8 Gen 1. It's a new naming scheme. Okay, what's the sexiest, most beautiful idea or concept to you about Snap Dragon? Let's start there.

The way I will describe it, and I think the reason we have been successful with it, is to really understand how to build a platform, a single chip, like a single chip, that will have every single capability if you want to make this smartphone and the palm of your hand, you know, something that has all of your computing needs. And it was the ability to get, from an engineering standpoint, ability to get into a single chip of not only all possible connectivity technology, from cell alert, to Wi Fi, to Bluetooth, to every single constellation of satellites for position location.

But at the same time, you know, a very power efficient, you know, single threaded, multi threaded CPU. A GPU for your, all of your graphic demands, gaming, fastest growing segment for gaming, is mobile gaming. An artificial intelligence processor, which we call the neural processor unit. And then a video engine, a multimedia engine for every single application, audio, everything. So it's a single chip that has every single computing technology you need in the phone. And what's exciting about it, is what we already knew, for example, when you think about camera or computer vision, you see that the advancements in the technology now happens in the smartphone first, versus additional camera.

So the beauty about the Snapdragon is, we always have this thing with within Qualcomm. The phone, it's small, you have to be able to hold it, you're going to touch your face so you cannot be hot, you have to manage thermals, you expect to have a full day of battery life. But then you wanted to not be sending data into 10 or 100 megabits, you want gigabits, you wanted to be able to have eight core processors, you want to have a GPU with ray tracing, you want to have all of those things that you can only get into sometimes a desktop PC.

And to do all of that in your phone and be able to be in the leadership position generation after generation is an incredible thing. And we're very proud of that at Qualcomm. Yes, you have to do the Y5, 5G, all the... And you have to be good at every one of those technologies. Pack it all in and there's also pressure to make the thing faster and faster and faster and then there's more and more applications that you're supposed to be effortlessly using. And then you mentioned the NPU, GPU, CPU, they have to also dance together somehow, that to communicate well, share memory or not depending on what the application is.

And your battery has to last all day. So think about that, from a company like Qualcomm, we have to be good and each and every one of those technologies, we can just say, oh, we're a CPU company or a GPU company or we're AI company, we have to do everything. What does it take to design a great processor? So design this system on a chip that you mentioned, is there some insight you can provide in this chaos of engineers, designers, leaders, the people that think about how much this is all going to cause the whole mess of it? I'm of course very partial about it.

I've been in this company for probably more than 26 years. But I'll argue that there are a couple things that are ingredients for the success. So we talk about the fact that you have all those different technologies, they evolve at their own pace and you have to be good in each one of them and you needed them to make them working together. So you need to have an engineering organization that's with incredible collaboration culture because everybody has to be working. The train is going to leave the station, every cart needs to be there. When it leaves the station, it needs to leave on time, especially in the phone business.

You can change Christmas, you cannot change Black Friday, you cannot change all of the selling seasons. So the phones are going to launch on time and every technology needs to be there. The engineer needs to work as one and we do have that at Qualcomm. The other thing you have to have incredible discipline because those are very complex systems. So in one way you have to design with quality because in many cases we're going to be ramping production and even before we have the silicon back and you have to rely on our simulation models and you have to rely on the fact that you design for commercial applications.

That takes a while to build and it's probably been the history of a semiconductor business at Qualcomm. So you mean like the framework of how many people can use simulation software and all that kind of stuff to build the thing with a hard deadline that you might not even get back from like manufacture before. You're not allowed to have any mistakes. No wonder our name is quality communications. Oh I never even thought about the Qual part. Quality. So quality and there's a bar that's high and you're not allowed to mess up. I mean to me as an engineer that's exciting.

Hard deadlines. No room for mistakes. I love it. Super stressful but I love it. So there's a couple of other small companies called Google and Apple. So Google is now using its own chip for the Pixel 6. Apple using its own. How does Qualcomm outcompete Google and Apple? How does it beat them? We don't have to outcompete Google. Actually if you look of our mobile strategy today and then one thing I was very clear when I became CEO. I think there's a lot of confusion in the market. Our mobile strategy is very clear. We are focused of making Snapdragon synonymous with premium Android experience.

That's what Snapdragon is. Android. The phone of the people. Yes. I just have a love for Android. No I'm constantly talking trash to iPhone people. Sorry go ahead. Premium Android experiences. So we do produce Snapdragon in multiple tier for every price point but you know every year you mentioned the HN1 and every year we provide you know the flagship product and then the other series that is trying to get the best of every possible technology at that time. And it's really focused on enabling the Android ecosystem. So I'll give an example. So you asked me the question how to compete with Google.

It's not about competing with Google. We're the number one enabler of the Google Android ecosystem. And the largest largest and number one customer there is actually Samsung. And if you look what happened to Samsung. Samsung I always had since I began my began my relationship with them because they always had their own chip. They always had their own chip. And if you'll just look what happened right now with the Galaxy S22 that just launched. You know they used to balance their business about 50% Qualcomm. They will get the most advanced markets like the United States and China and Japan and Korea they will assign a Qualcomm.

And then they'll have their own chip for the markets that they would will be like more emerging markets open markets markets that they have a control on the channel because they sell a lot of appliances and other things. If you look what happened right now GS22. 75% is Qualcomm. And then the next large OEMs and Android system are the Chinese ones. Companies like Xiaomi. One of the fastest growing. It was number one in Europe at some point last year. Then followed by OPPO and OnePlus and Vivo. So those are some of the largest Qualcomm customers.

And they actually drive the Android ecosystem. And that's our mobile strategy. And fully aligned with Google. And it's working. And I was you know I'm not to get into a lot of the investor conversation. But we're also happy we became in a beneficiary of the shifts that we saw in the marketplace. As Huawei became a smaller OEM as a result of the sanctions. We saw the rise of a lot of the other OEMs from China. Especially for China domestic market Xiaomi OPPO Vivo. They moved to the premium category. They're all doing that with Qualcomm. So we're actually very fortunate and happy with the position we are in mobile business.

We do have an Apple relationship. We provide modem technology to Apple. It's a multi year relationship. Apple has been very public that they are investing to develop their own modem. But the Qualcomm strategy has been clear. We're really focused on Snapdragon. Our mobile strategy is not defined by providing a cellular modem to Apple. Our mobile strategy is this that we just talk about it. It's about the unique thing of Snapdragon. It has every single technology integrated into a single SoC. It provides a premium experience. And that's what we're doing and focusing on the Android ecosystem.

I don't know if I can ask you this kind of question. It's like picking your children or something like this. But what smartphone the Snapdragon. You mentioned Samsung Galaxy S22. One plus those are phones I personally really enjoy. What phone do you currently use. Or do you have multiple phones. I do have multiple phones but I do use Galaxy S22. That's your favorite one. All right. Well you heard it here first folks. Okay so excellent. Can Qualcomm also let's take a brief step away from mobile. And take on Intel and Apple and other such companies in the laptop and desktop space.

So the nature of what a computer is seems to be changing. It's like smartphones like merging. It's all being a smartphone just with the biggest screen or something like this. So what is the future of that look like. Before I answer that question. Let me just step back a little bit. Because and I'm sure we can we can talk more about those things. But the the reality is Qualcomm is changing a lot. And we use I know we spend a lot of time talking about 5G and smartphone and Snapdragon. And I think that has been what had defined Qualcomm for many years.

But the reality is even consistent with that 5G conversation. Which is a technology to connect everything. Qualcomm is also changing. Our technology that was in many cases designed for phones. And we said at the beginning. Connectivity and processing. Is going to virtually every industry. And as a result Qualcomm is really changing with it. And expending to a number of different addressable markets. Some of those markets is the PC. As you talk about it. The the conversions of mobile and PC. And the reason I'm excited about this. Because you see a lot of things happening that bring this right front and center when you think about the future technology.

So what we learn with the pandemic. Is that the number one use case of personal computers. Is communications. It is interesting when you think about that. That's the number one use case on a PC today is communications. It's actually funny because in the cellular industry. Actually I'll say let me step back. In the telecom industry. We've been chasing this killer application of video telephony for decades right. I remember. Back then in the wire line. Even before the internet and IP ISDN. You remember those AT&T desk phones of a little screen. And I said you can do video telephony.

We don't watch that. In back to the future too. Then when we started developing 3G said people said what's the application for having data to itself. All video telephony. Then we started doing 4G. And in the beginning people said well why do you need all this broadband. All video telephony. But it took a pandemic. To make video telephony. The killer application. And that's now the number one use case on a PC. So now think about that for a second. Personal computers now. There are technologies that people when they are going to buy a PC. They didn't care much about it.

Now they do. Camera. Camera. How good is the camera. The audio. Is that connected. How good is the connectivity. Do you have the latest and greatest Wi Fi in cellular. What's the battery life. Because you're going to be working from anywhere. Sometimes you need to ask. Sometimes you're not. So all those things. What's the portability like. So those things started to change how we should think about the PC. But I won't stop there. Let me talk about another trend. So in it. And all come as a result of what we saw the pandemic. Let's say that you are.

You're an engineer. You're the computer aided design. You have advanced desktop computer or workstation in your office. But you want to work from home someday. So you're not going to move that to your home. So what do you need to do. You're going to have to rely on that. You're going to run that on the cloud. And you can run another cloud. You need high bandwidth. Because you almost want the cloud. To be. The same as your computer for that use case. That's the 5g on demand computing use case. The use 5g is almost a link between two computers.

But then. You know CIOs are saying well my workforce is going home for some days. I want all the data to be in the cloud. You look at for example Microsoft OneDrive. Or the ability to collaborate. You need the bandwidth. So that when you put all of those things together. You start thinking about what is the next generation PC. And that's the opportunity for Qualcomm. I'm just giving an example. Back in Mobile World Congress. Recently Lenovo. They have a line of enterprise laptops called the ThinkPad. I'm sure you're familiar with it. So they announced the ThinkPad based on Snapdragon.

With 5g on. 28 hours of battery life. So that's next generation. It's just a nice screen with extremely high. Nice screen and keyboard. And extremely high connectivity to maybe an even more like a more powerful machine in the cloud. Something more the data connecting to the data connecting to compute all that kind of stuff. You have the camera capabilities. Let me go one step more. Microsoft talking about some of the features they're doing now. Using on Windows 11. Using Snapdragon. Remember we talk about a Snapdragon has an AI processor inside there. So one of the cool features Microsoft's talking about it is.

You can be on a team's call. And you can make sure your eyes are looking at the camera. 100% of the time. Well that's an interesting so they can be talking about that. And you do that with AI. Yes. That's really tricky to pull off. For example the reason I'm a huge stickler for doing these in person. These conversations in person. It's really tough to get right. But it's a worthy challenge. So that's where the metaverse hopes to. So like I just because you said the importance of this telephony. Of humans connecting teleporting themselves. Getting that right is really difficult.

There's a lot of people hate Zoom meetings. But that doesn't mean you can't improve that experience. And get rid of the hate. A lot of people hate talking to the car too. Because the voice. The natural language processing is terrible. But when it's not. It's a beautiful thing. So getting that right is. This is an opportunity. This is an opportunity. Think about it. It starts with the PC making. The PC giving you a better experience for teams. But then. It goes right back into. This trend of connecting physical and digital spaces. And all the work we're doing.

With the metaverse and virtual reality and the meta reality and the future is. Why not. Call somebody or connect with somebody with a hologram. It's possible. And also to mention. Some. Increasing amount of intelligence in our cars. So semi autonomous autonomous cars and the interactivity between human and. And car. Which for me things are. Really exciting. Let me ask you a big question. So when when aliens again now on the other side. Right. And humans destroy themselves through nuclear war centuries from now. Let's hope not. Let's hope not. But in case you know let's just hypothetical thought experiment.

And they write a history of humanity in the twenty first century. What would they remember Qualcomm. In the twenty first century as a company would be a car company. Would it like think of all the crazy pivots that might happen the next like. Fifty years. Because because you're thinking you said. Qualcomm enables all of these things with 5G and they'll be probably. Other G's. It keeps increasing. So basically connectivity and computation. And everything becomes connected and everything is capable of computation. Might you be become a robotics and car company. I will argue we already an automotive company today and but.

Let me tell what I. Would I like Qualcomm to be. Remember and recognize for. I think everyone. The knows Qualcomm. Immediately. You know connect us pun intended. To connectivity and wireless. But the reality is. We're been actually the company providing intelligence. And in processing. To everything on the edge. Everything outside the data center. That's we're doing. Those billions of devices are going to be connected. And and that's kind of explain when we talk about the connected intelligent edge. To be on phones. Cars. B. C. and all of those. And the broader I. O. T. as we talk about everything will be connected intelligent.

And that's what we want Qualcomm to be recognized for. So by the way for people who are not familiar. There's some technical jargon. But people use the word edge. Like edge computing. It's up by the way that's probably changing what that even means. It's basically everything that's not a giant thing that's make a lot of noise in a building somewhere. So it's mobile devices. And the mobile devices of all kinds of well. A refrigerator is not mobile. But it would be edge. So it's like what's a sandwich. That kind of discussion. But basically edge computing.

Is is. The edge of that expanding space you mentioned. That Qualcomm is trying to. Connect. And enable with computation. Here's a simple way to describe. What the edge. Is an edge computing is. I think as we think about the evolution of the data center. You need to bring the computational closer to the devices. Also when you put the computation together with the connectivity. At the same time. You're going to see a lot of advancement of artificial intelligence. Happening closer. Or at the device. Look it's a very. I have a simple way to describe. Remember. In the beginning of this conversation we talk about.

In the 4G era. Broadband. And mobile computing evolve side by side. If you're going to have broadband you might as well have a computer in the palm of your hand. So we needed to invest in those two technologies. In 5G AI develops side by side. You're connected to the cloud 100 percent of the time. You have a high bandwidth. And you have now a smart and intelligent thing that can make decision in real time. Provide context information to the cloud to make the models more accurate. And as well compare and contrast to the cloud. So there's going to be an exponential development AI happening.

With. All the edge devices. The devices they're outside the data center. And computation is going to go alongside that. And a great example that's the car. The car. You know. We haven't talked much about the car. But you know Qualcomm is now. You could argue was as much as an automotive company as a wireless company working 26 global brands. And it's easy to see. If you look at our mobile heritage. And we talk about form factors. Thermal. Battery life. You're not going to put a server in a trunk of a car. But you need as much computational capabilities.

And as we see Qualcomm. Providing. You know as the car become a connected computer on wheels. We provide the computational. And all the sensors for you to do assisted driving. For the new digital cockpit experience. Connecting the car to the cloud. And it's all of that's happening at the end. This Qualcomm want to be the brain. Of a lot of autonomous vehicles in the future of different. You said brands. Like Mercedes BMT. I don't know whatever. Just whatever car. You know. Cars have the sexy thing they do. And then it defines their brand. And so on.

And then there's the brain. That doesn't need to have branding suppose. You know. So does Qualcomm see that. Or will I be able to buy a Qualcomm car. Like literally. No. You're not going to be able to buy a Qualcomm car. But we are ready. We're ready. On our way. To become. You know the brains of the car. The way you should think about Qualcomm automotive strategy is. The car companies. Realize. They need to become technology companies. You just look for example. Of the market cap. Of some of the new. Electrical. Commerce. And compare them with.

With the legacy. Car companies. Which one is that I heard of. Well let's just use an example. One of them lives in Austin. Let's say Rivian. Right. Rivian. Oh that one too. Yes. You know the car companies are not going away. It's actually a mistake not to bet in the car companies. The car companies need a technology partner. That will provide. The digital chassis. For them. And that's what we're doing. So if you look at Qualcomm we talk about a Snapdragon digital chassis. So. We. Want to be the preferred technology partner. Off. The car companies and I think it's working.

Strategy is working right now. So basically. Helping company. The car companies accelerate into this. Into becoming technology companies. Connecting the car to the cloud. We design the interior of the digital cockpit experience. And provide the computation and sensor capabilities for autonomy and assisted driving. On the topic of robots. When millions or billions of robots roam the earth in the future. Among us humans. And I am. For one. Concerned. In a small percentage. But largely I'm excited about that future. Will Qualcomm. Be. The thing that powers their brain. We have an in our IOT business. Which has been one of the fastest growing business for us.

A number of robotics engagement. So I'll give you some example. In. If you look of the Amazon Astro. You familiar with that. There's two. There's two Snapdragon in there. There is. This is really exciting. They're supposed to ship it to me. Where is it. Okay. But anyway. That's really cool. I didn't know it was Snapdragon. Yeah. We we're working with robotics in industrial. Of course. Drones. You know. We're getting. More and more traction for robotics. Sorry to interrupt. Industrial robotics too. You said industrial. Especially when you think about. What's going to happen. With. The factory of the future.

The industrial side of the future. The warehouse of the future. When you bring. Five G. For example to it. And you have. A number of different use cases and. In. And then you see a lot of robotics application. And. And of course. Drones. And. The most famous. I will consider that a robot. The most famous. Robot. In the world right now. It's powered by Snapdragon. Which is the Mars. Ingenuity helicopter. Yeah. The whole helicopter. The cameras and everything. It's powered by Snapdragon. And. Talking about. Exciting thing for an engineer. The same Snapdragon that goes to a phone.

And it can go to a galaxy phone. For example Samsung. The same. Not a special one. Went all the way to Mars. Is exploring other planets looking for alien life. And maybe gets to meet him. Wouldn't that be interesting. If a snapdragon is the thing that first sees an alien. Is like what the hell. We did not program this in the computer vision. I once used example to go back to the conversation we had about quality. As an engineer. You need to make sure it works. Can you imagine if it gets over there in Mars and it doesn't work.

Listen this is very stressful. What NASA with SpaceX with all those companies are doing is extremely stressful. The room for mistakes is. Is tiny. But that's super exciting for an engineer once again. There's been a global semiconductor chip shortage. So from your perspective. Just to be interesting to get your expert analysis of the situation. What do you think are the main reasons. And how is quality affected. How can it help. In this. In the future. Things like it. Okay that's a. That's a. A big topic of conversation. And we only have five minutes. So I'll try.

I'll try to be as objective as I can. So first let's talk about what caused it. And I. You know you hear a lot of different things. I would try to put it within the right context. The first thing that caused it really. Is the acceleration of digital transformation. Of pretty much. Everything in every industry. Every industry has been digitally transformed. And as such. The amount of semiconductors that are required is much larger. Just to give you a practical example. If you think about the automotive as an example. The cars there are you. There's cars there are launch a new model launching today.

The new model launching today most likely has ten x the amount of chips. Off the prior model. And the model is people working on this coming in next probably ten x that one. So you see the amount of silicon and in billions of things become smart. More and more data goes to the cloud. The data center grows. So the floor for semiconductor consumptions went up by a lot. Then you have things that aggravated this. The pandemic aggravated this. There is a couple trends. From the pandemic. The enterprise transformation of the home. The home became an enterprise massive amount of upgrades on broadband and iot.

The office. Has changed to the way we work now. In including the ability to support collaboration tools and video. Then you have. The. Higher demand. For for products. Doing the pandemic. Because people wanted to be connected. People bought new phones and new tablets and new computers. New gaming. So all of those things came on top of that. As. That aggravated the issue. But they're not the main issue. The main issue is. It's actually. A long term growth. Of digital. So what i'm hearing you say. Is. The pandemic was not the cause. It was an aggravation.

Is an aggravation. So. Is there a way. We can support. As a human civilization. In terms of manufacture. In terms of supply. The kind of growth that you're talking about. In devices and so on. Is there. High level ideas you can save. What that's required there. Yes and i think that's. The second part of the answer. So what's happening now. How are we gonna get out of this. So. We see a lot. Of capacity investments put into place by the industry. You know we had invested a lot of our suppliers. A lot of the suppliers.

Had made. Plans about. You know. Increasing the capacity industry explaining to double. It's total semiconductor manufacturing capacity. Within the next. Five years an example. So that's already happening. And then you see things which are actually good. They're good. The initiative such as the United States chips act. And now the European chips act. The United States chips acts about fifty two billion dollars. The Europeans about forty three. Their goal combined. Is to get at least fifty percent of the consumption. With manufacturing stalled within the US. And European geographies. And that's also very good. That's yet another.

Incentive for more manufacturing capacity be built. And to be built. With a geographic distributed way. Which that's how you plan supply chains. So those. Those I think are good things. So if anything we learn. Through the crisis. Is this a my conductor. Is important. My conductor companies are important. And we need to invest in semiconductors. Returning to the grilling of the CEO. The hard questions. This is almost for my own education of the space. You mentioned regulators. Qualcomm paid out and received payment of billions of dollars and settlement and fines. There seems to be a lot of huge lawsuits in the space.

How do you explain that. Does. Does this get in the way of innovation. Or does it promote it. I will rephrase it by saying they used to be. A lot. Of lawsuits in this space. In addition. Of. Of what we do in semiconductors. You know our processors and our our modems. The Snapdragon platform. We also have a licensing business. Which has been a part of the company since the beginning. As the largest. Inventors. Of the essential technology. In. Two G. CDMA. Three G. Four G. And five G. You know and Qualcomm contribute that to the standards.

So we always had this model that. Rather than invent the technology and be the only one producing the products we license so everyone can produce it. And. And as such we receive intellectual property. For the standard essential patents. As part of our past dispute with Apple. That's behind us now. Your friends now. They're. They're. They're my customers. And. And as part of that I think the. The licensing model. Yes. Got tested. In. I think in every geography. And we succeeded. In every single geography. To validate. The. Pro competitive. The next of this model. I think the.

The fair reasonable non discriminatory aspect of this model. And I would argue that. Besides being the most successful licensing business to date. And the industry. Probably the one that's been battle tested. And this most stable. Because there's not a single. Jurisdiction that we have not. Had to validate that model. So. It's part of our past. And what he creates is probably create a lot of stability. No licensing business. But having said that. The growth of the company is in the semiconductor space. And the semiconductor. So licensing is you come up with a pretty good idea.

You have a bunch of smart people coming up with cool ideas. And then once you come up with that idea. You sell that idea to others. They get to use it. That's essentially what a license. The license revenue we have. Is. Is for the. What we call the SCP. Standard essential patents. That are part of. The. Two G. Three G. Four G. And five G. Standards. So if you want to build anything with five G. You need it to. Get a license from Qualcomm. Because uses Qualcomm. Essential technology is part of the standard. And a slightly different model.

Or a lot different model. The semiconductor. Is you design. You inject a bunch of fascinating ideas. How to build the snapdragon. And then there's. Because it's a fabulous company. You have somebody build. The. This. The. The chip. And it goes into a phone with the branding and all that kind of stuff. And. And that has less kind of. Players involved. It's not a license. We sell the product. In the semiconductor. We don't license semiconductor technology. We build products. And we sell products. This is your first year as a CEO. No. Not one year yet. Not one year yet.

Yeah. Let's hope it'll be in June. It'll be one year. Okay. This is a. A company that's involved. With a lot of fascinating technologies. And it's touching the lives of billions of people. A lot of complicated stuff. Like I said, licensing technologies. You have to collaborate with manufacturers. You have to then work with however many you said car companies and all these clients and so on. And you have to. You know with with tech companies. Apple and so on. What's that like? What lessons have you learned about leadership? And maybe about yourself as a human being from this first.

Almost a year. Soon to be a year as a CEO of this incredible, this complex, this large company. That's a little bit of a question. Let me answer in reverse order. First thing that I learned. And I think it's probably common. Across CEOs. Especially in our industry. Yes. It will be great if I had more time. I think there's. Especially because we're growing so many areas. And there's so many things to learn. So many relationships to build. Time to spend with a number of different technologies. And. And. But I kind of reflect really the size of the opportunity that exists for Qualcomm.

Qualcomm. It is really growing in a number of different directions. All at the same time. And so it did got busier. And part of this is because I'm spending a lot of time understanding the new industries we're going in and building relationships. Second thing, which is a lot to do with how I think about things and a little bit of my personality. At the end of the day, business partnerships really done by people. And I think the importance of having trusted relationships for the long term is extremely important. And I've been dedicated to do that as CEO.

We're not a company that plays for the short term. We don't. And when we build new partnerships, we expect that to be for decades. And so I spend time doing that. And I think that's important for Qualcomm. The other part of your question is we do have a lot of opportunities in all different areas. What we like and I've been fortunate enough to become CEO at a time that a lot of the trends are pointing to our technology. We talk about some of them. We talk about merger of physical and digital spaces. We talk about the transformation of the automobile.

We talk about the merge of computing and mobile. The enterprise transformation of the home. There are many of those trends. And those trends create opportunities for Qualcomm to be providing technology first and as such we're in a hurry. So I'm in a little bit of a hurry because I think the opportunity is incredible for technology but having fun and enjoying the job. Is there a burden because of so much what you said is partnerships and almost like friendships, connections with other human beings. Me as an introvert that has a lot of social anxiety, that seems extremely stressful.

So is there that burden on your shoulders? You have to wake up every day and talk to friends you've had for many years. It could be, you know, and then convince them and make partnerships with them. Talk with them. Describe to them the future. Sell them an idea and then yourself grow because you don't know what the heck the future is going to be like. You have to project both confidence and humility. All those kinds of things. Is that exhausting? It is exhausting but it's something I do like to do and it's not only with partners really.

It's also internally to your employees. I think to get alignment on the vision and faith in the vision and execute and at the end of the day we're very fortunate. We have a lot of smart people. So people when if they're aligned with the vision they know what to do and then of course as CEO you have to convince your investors that that's the right idea as well. If you can put on your wise sage hat. Do you have advice for young people in high school and college? You yourself started from the humble beginnings in Brazil.

Maybe a bit of a wild risky decision to go to Japan and now are at the head of one of the biggest, most successful, most impactful companies in the world. Given that story can you give advice to young people today that you know how they can have a career or just the life they can be proud of? I think the first thing and of course all those answers are going to relate to my own experience right. The first thing is it always work for me to have a plan. Even if the plan is just what I'm going to do in the next two years but what do I want to do? Where do I want to go? I think it's important for people especially young people is to really have a dream and go pursue it.

I mean have dreams not go back to bed to sleep is really what do you want to accomplish and then what it's going to take to do that and then believe in yourself. Like I said I joined Qualcomm as an engineer and I didn't have any plans when I joined to be CEO but I do want as an engineer what I wanted to do, where I want to contribute what I wanted to work on and then and then keep evolving from that point in time. The other thing is this is an advice, it's more of like career advice that I got early in my career was extremely helpful for me and I will give that advice to everyone that is interested.

Spend time understanding what are the things you're good at and what are things you're not. Like what is that real border between your area of competence and your area of incompetence and once you see that once you see that you know exactly what you have to work on and you can say I can if I did that's what I want to go next this is the gap I need to do it and it's it's faster when you can identify yourself before other people can tell you then it leads to automatically the next step. Surround yourself the people they're very good the things that you're not.

So yes you're radically honest about the things that you're not good at but given what you're passionate about you need to get good at or you would like to get good at and surround yourself by those people. How often did the plans you make actually work out? You said it's important to make plans you didn't say anything about it's important to execute on those plans. More than 50% success rate. Try to keep it above 50. What was the whole why did you end up in Japan? You know I've been fortunate enough to work in cellular and wireless my entire career so I I always like communications.

When I enter engineering school my dad was electrical engineer but he worked with the utility company he wanted to me to graduate in traditional electrical engineering like energy generation distribution and but I like electronics communication so I end up doing both and and I always like communication was fascinated by wireless communication so my first job at a college is start working for a Japanese company down in Brazil was NEC and within about a year in they transferred me to Tokyo asked me to go to the headquarters and it was the first time I left Brazil and a little bit different from Brazil culturally different is in the other side of the planet and and that's how it started you said your father's an electrical engineer do you think what you're doing now makes your father proud I think he's very proud I think especially you know he tells me that you know I'm still the same person never change and does he still does he give you advice does he criticize what you're doing tell you how to improve my my mom and that's to give me advice today I'm very fortunate for that but he's proud also proud because there are very few Brazilians that have you know achieve a position as CEO of of a company in size of Qualcomm and I and I do know that that also I carry a burden I you know I especially for the Latino community to be an inspiration for them and make sure I set a good example so not just your your mom and dad but the culture the people that were originally your home do you uh you know life is finite do you think about your own mortality look I'm a I'm a devout Christian and so I'm a big believer that there's this is just a transition and but don't spend a lot of time thinking about that I'm I am somebody good better and different that try as much as possible to leave the present and that's what I do and try to make the present better on this on this place here on earth absolutely absolutely and that some of these technologies some of these ideas are kind of a different kind of immortality as well because they they propagate through time and have impact on people in the best possible way so technology can be scary can technology can be destructive but it seems like in the end it can be it can do a lot of good more good there's more good than bad what do you think is the meaning of this whole thing I asked you about aliens observing us what what's the meaning of life Christiano what's the meaning of life easy questions that's not an easy question at all uh I think that's uh that's a question at least for me you have to answer individually uh but uh I do believe we're all here for purpose you know I I you know in my prayers I always ask that you know I I stay on track whatever my purpose is but I do believe we're here for purpose and we need to do the best we can during the time we have on this earth so that means create beautiful things for you as an engineer yes and and create beautiful things yes what about love what's the role of love in the human condition love's very important and uh it's an essential part of uh being human it comes in the package and uh I think if you look at the situation what's happening right now I think uh you look at the situation with some of the underprivileged uh communities you look at the harmless situation I think we all need more love yeah and I think people that build incredible technology sometimes forget the love part like those are all it's all integrated there's no thinking about humanity is really important when you build tools that empower that humanity because there's I think I at least that person I believe we're all capable of both evil and good and we have to build technology build societies build governments build communities that um inspires to to connect with the good part within all of us I'm a big believer that technology is at the end the force for good and if just look if you just look you know not trying to move away from a deep discussion to a more uh specific technical one but if we start the conversation talk about smartphones and uh smartphones really the first time that you could say that everybody in the world was able to connect to the internet and connect to each other and I think what uh that empowerment that that provided it's an incredible force for good well the company you lead the the technology you've created one of them that I'm especially excited about which is snapdragon the whole line of processors there currently I would say at about 10 billion transistors if you think about the human brain it's about a hundred billion neurons so I think uh 11 samsung galaxy 22s s22s are already smarter than me and that's being nice uh to me I'm really honored to use but you're extremely valuable time with me even though you said Pillai is the favorite player beyond all of that I think you're an incredible person incredible leader and you lead an incredible engineering company so thank you for doing that oh thank you so much thank you for the kind words really a pleasure having this conversation I really had a lot of fun doing it and uh thank you for having me in your podcast thanks for listening to this conversation with Christiana Oman to support this podcast please check out our sponsors in the description and now let me leave you with some words from Stephen Hawking for millions of years mankind lived just like the animals then something happened which unleashed the power of our imagination we learned to talk and we learned to listen speech has allowed the communication of ideas enabling human beings to work together to build the impossible mankind's greatest achievements have come about by talking and its greatest failures by not talking it doesn't have to be like this our greatest hopes could become reality in the future with the technology at our disposal the possibilities are unbounded all we need to do is make sure we keep talking thank you for listening and hope to see you next time


